Insight Upper-intermediate End-ofyear Test A
Answer key

4

B

5

A

A Grammar
1 A
2 B
3 C
4 B
5 A
6 B
7 C
8 B
9 C
10 B
11 C
12 B
13 C
14 A
15 A
16 C
17 B
18 B
19 C
20 A
1

2

3

6

A

The is correct because we use the with adjectives that
describe groups of people.
– (no article) is not correct because we need to use an
article with adjectives that describe groups of people.
A is not correct because we do not use a/an with
adjectives that describe groups of people.

7

B

To be taken is correct because we use the passive with
by when we want to say who does an action, such as by
her colleagues. We use to be + past participle after
certain verbs, such as want.
To take is not correct because we do not use the
infinitive with to after verbs like want in passive
structures.
Being taken is not correct because we do not use -ing
form + past participle after verbs like want in passive
structures.

8

C

Hadn’t discussed is correct because we use the third
conditional to talk about unreal situations in the past.
We use the past perfect simple in the if clause, for
example hadn’t discussed, and might have + past
participle in the result clause, for example it might have
ended their friendship.
Didn’t discuss is not correct because we do not use the
past simple in third conditionals to talk about unreal
situations in the past.
Don’t discuss is not correct because we do not use the
present simple in third conditionals to talk about unreal
situations in the past.

© Oxford University Press

9

They’d rather have saved is correct because we use
would rather + have + past participle to talk about
something that did not happen in the past, for example
they’d rather have saved the money, but that we
wanted instead of what did happen, such as they did
not save the money because they spent it on books.
They’d rather save is not correct because we do not use
would rather + infinitive without to to describe a
preference in the past.
They’d rather be saving is not correct because we do
not use would rather + present continuous to describe a
preference in the past.
Almost none is correct because we use almost none + of
to talk about the very least number of something or
someone in a negative way. In this case, the very least
possible number of students arrived on time.
Several is not correct because we do not use several to
talk about the least number of something or someone.
A few is not correct because we do not use a few to talk
about the very least number of something or someone
in a negative way. We use a few to talk about small
quantities or numbers of things in a positive way.

B

Whom we were talking about is correct because we can
use whom for a person who is the object of a relative
clause. It is considered formal.
Who we were talking about her is not correct because
we do not repeat the object of a relative clause.
That was talking about is not correct because we
cannot use that for a person who is the object of a
relative clause. The subject of the relative clause is also
missing.

C

Couldn’t have hoped is correct because we use reported
speech to tell someone what another person has said.
We use couldn’t have + past participle to say we are
sure something was not true.
Couldn’t hope is not correct because we do not use
couldn’t + infinitive without to in reported speech to
report what someone said in the past.
Can’t have hoped is not correct because we do not use
can’t have + past participle in reported speech to report
what someone said in the past.

B

Whatever is correct because we can use whatever to
mean it does not matter what thing or idea you choose
when introducing a relative clause. In this case, the
children enjoy playing outside when the weather is
good or bad because it does not make a difference.
However is not correct because we do not use however
to refer to things, such as playing outside in all types of
weather.
Wherever is not correct because we do not use
wherever to refer to things, such as playing outside in
all types of weather.

C

You’d better not is correct because we use had better
(not) + infinitive without to to give advice or a warning,
such as I’m warning you.
You don’t have to is not correct because we do not use
don’t have to + infinitive to give advice or a warning.

Insight Upper-intermediate • Answer key

1

You must is not correct because we do not use must +
infinitive without to to give advice or a warning.

10 B

To pick up is correct because we can use remember
with the -ing form and with the infinitive with to, but
the meaning changes. Here, we use remember +
infinitive with to to talk about something you should do
or want to do, such as pick up some milk.
Picking up is not correct because we do not use
remember + -ing form to talk about something you
should do or want to do.
Pick up is not correct because we cannot use remember
+ infinitive without to to talk about something you
should do or want to do.

Would leave is not correct because we do not use
would to express that we are annoyed with a person or
situation.

16 C

Could is correct because we use could + infinitive
without to to talk about general ability in the past.
Will be able to is not correct because we do not use will
be able to + infinitive to talk about general ability in the
past.
Is able to is not correct because we do not use be able
to + infinitive to talk about general ability in the past.

17 B

Must have left is correct because we use must have +
past participle to say that we are very sure something
was true in the past. For example, the mother is sure
that if her son has looked everywhere at home for the
book, the only other possibility is that he left it at school.
Must leave is not correct because we do not use must +
infinitive without to to say that we are very sure
something was true in the past.
Might leave is not correct because we do not use might
+ infinitive without to to say that we are very sure
something was true in the past.

11 C

Being heard is correct because we use the passive being
+ past participle after some prepositions, such as
without.
To be heard is not correct because we do not use the
passive to be + past participle after without.
Heard is not correct because we do not use the past
simple after without.

12 B

I’ll ever get used to living is correct because we use get
used to to mean that an activity is becoming easier or
more familiar.
I’m ever used to living is not correct because we do not
use be used to to mean that an activity is becoming
easier or more familiar.
I ever used to live is not correct because we do not use
used to to mean that an activity is becoming easier or
more familiar.

18 B

Never before is correct because we use never before at
the front of a sentence to mean that something has
never happened. After an adverbial phrase with a
negative meaning, such as never before, we change the
word order of the subject, auxiliary verb and verb.
Not only is not correct because we do not use not only
at the front of a sentence to mean that something has
not happened.
No sooner is not correct because we do not use no
sooner at the front of a sentence to mean that
something has not happened.

13 C

Wouldn’t have believed is correct because we use the
third conditional to talk about an unreal situation in the
past. We use the past perfect simple in the if clause,
such as If Tom hadn’t known Mariam, and would have +
past participle in the result clause, for example he
wouldn’t have believed her.
Wouldn’t believe is not correct because we do not use
wouldn’t + infinitive without to in the result clause
when we talk about an unreal situation in the past.
Hadn’t believed is not correct because we do not use
the past perfect simple in the result clause when we
talk about an unreal situation in the past.

14 A

Shouldn’t have waited is correct because we use
shouldn’t have + past participle to say we are sorry
about things people did not do in the past and to
suggest what would have been better, for example you
shouldn’t have waited so long.
Ought to have waited is not correct because we do not
use ought to have + past participle to say we are sorry
about things people did in the past.
Needed to wait is not correct because we do not use
needed + infinitive with to to say we are sorry about
things people did in the past.

15 A

Will leave is correct because we use will to express that
we are annoyed with a person or situation. We know
the speaker is annoyed because they say It drives me
crazy.
Left is not correct because we do not use the past
simple to express that we are annoyed with a person or
situation.

© Oxford University Press

19 C

Knowing is correct because we use verb + -ing form
with verbs like admit in reported speech.
Know is not correct because we do not use verb +
infinitive without to with verbs like admit in reported
speech.
To know is not correct because we do not use verb +
infinitive with to with verbs like admit in reported
speech.

20 A

Bringing is correct because we use present participle
clauses, mainly in writing, to express things in fewer
words.
Brought is not correct because we do not use a past
participle in place of a present participle to talk about
facts.
Not bringing is not correct because we do not need a
negative meaning in this sentence.

B Reading
1
2
3
4
5
6

B
C
A
B
C
C

Insight Upper-intermediate • Answer key

2

1

B

2

C

3

4

To ask Priya if she is available to offer some advice is
correct because the text says I wondered whether I
could go over the options with you. You’re good at
seeing things from different angles, which isn’t one of
my strengths. I need a bit of input from someone else.
This means that she would like Priya to help her.
To invite Priya to a social event at her house is not
correct because the text says How about dropping
round later but this is because she needs Priya’s help
and she is not inviting her to a social event.
To offer to do Priya a favour by making her favourite
dish is not correct because the text says I’ve bought
that cherry pie you love which means that Emily did not
make the pie and she is not doing a favour for Priya in
making it.
It has been out of use lately is correct because the text
says Note: it has been stuck in the garage for a year, so
may need a couple of long runs to warm it back up. This
means that the scooter has not been used for a while.
It requires several repairs is not correct because the text
says small scratch to rear (barely visible), tyres recently
replaced. This means that it is difficult to see the
scratch and the scooter has had new tyres. Therefore,
there are not several repairs to make.
It can be tried out anytime if necessary is not correct
because the text says evenings only when referring to
taking the scooter for a test drive.

5

C

6

C

A

To provide ideas to readers for new outfits is correct
because the text says Read on to find out how to make
thrilling combinations from items that are already in
your wardrobe. This means that the blog will contain
useful advice on how to create new outfits from clothes
the reader already has.
To convince readers to purchase new clothing is not
correct because the text says find out how to make
thrilling combinations from items that are already in
your wardrobe. This means the writer thinks it is not
necessary to buy new clothes.
To tell readers which shops have bargains is not correct
because although the text says Not feeling wealthy?
Don’t worry! it then makes a suggestion to avoid
spending any money rather than suggesting which
shops have bargains.

B

It might be confusing to some viewers is correct
because the text says That creates problems if you
haven’t revisited Series 1 since its launch on Flicks. It’s
just as hard to keep up with all the twists and turns this
time around. This means that the previous season of
The Overland had lots of twists and turns, and the
second series is no different. The twists and turns make
it confusing for viewers.
It is not as impressive as the previous series is not
correct because the text says The good news is that all
your favourite characters are back and they’re as
realistic as ever. This suggests that the series is just as
good as the previous one.
Its ending does not make a lot of sense is not correct
because the text says at least the final scenes aren’t
mysterious in this series. This means that the previous
series had a mysterious ending, but this one does not.

© Oxford University Press

Services can be used if people have the right access is
correct because the text says Books can be requested
via our online ordering system for those with a valid
library membership. This means that people who have a
valid library membership can use the services while the
library is closed.
Services may be delayed by faults in the online system is
not correct because the text says Should you wish to
register for one, please do so before the library closes as
there is no facility for this online. This means that
readers cannot go online to get a membership, but this
is not the same as a fault with the system.
Services will all be unavailable from Monday for a while
is not correct because the text says The library will be
closed from Monday onwards for an indefinite period
while repairs to the roof are carried out. Books can be
requested. This means that the library building will be
closed, but readers can still borrow books using the
online service.
To give an instruction is correct because the text says
Hurry up. This is an instruction because Elizabeth needs
Oscar to come home quickly.
To offer advice is not correct because the text says You
need to be here when he comes through the door. This
is not advice, but a reminder from Elizabeth for Oscar
about the situation.
To report a danger is not correct because although the
text says you’re in danger of missing all the fun, this
does not mean that the situation is dangerous, just that
there is a risk that Oscar will be late.

C Reading
1
2
3
4
5
6

B
A
C
B
A
A

1

B

To provide the necessary items to isolated students is
correct because the speaker says my aim was to
transport educational materials, such as books and
tablets, to young people who live on a remote island.
This means that the floating school was set up in order
to provide educational materials to students who do
not live near others.
To put students in contact with those on the mainland is
not correct because the speaker says While some young
people travel to the mainland for continuing education,
this can be inconvenient … especially for those of
primary-school age. This means that older students may
go to school on the mainland, but this was not the aim
of the project when it was set up.
To satisfy the needs of lonely young students is not
correct because the speaker says Life here can feel
isolated, partly due to the lack of internet. This means
that life on the islands can feel isolated, but the text
does not say that the floating school helps students to
feel less lonely.

Insight Upper-intermediate • Answer key

3

2

3

4

They encourage students to work in fields relevant to
the islands is not correct because the speaker says
Those students who do go on to further education often
take the route of one of the professionals they’ve talked
to, and many adapt their university courses to maintain
a connection with the island. For example, a medical
worker might focus on traditional medicine. This means
that students who have met the facilitators often go
into similar fields, but the text does not say that the
facilitators encourage them to go into one of these
fields.

A

The curriculum used on the mainland is not very helpful
for islanders is correct because the speaker says we
have developed a curriculum of subjects which suits life
on the island, that varies significantly from the national
one used on the mainland. Our programme is more
informal and focused around what is relevant to our
students’ lives. This means that the floating school is
able to provide education which suits students better
than the curriculum used on the mainland.
The floating school is obliged to offer some formal
training to students is not correct because the speaker
talks about the different curricula, including that of the
floating school and that of the mainland, but it is clear
that the writer has control of what is taught in the
floating school curriculum, so they are not obliged to
follow that of the mainland.
Students of the floating school can suggest subjects that
will benefit them is not correct because the speaker
says many young people are involved in fishing which is
necessary to help support their families. Typical
education follows a national curriculum which doesn’t
cover the maritime or fishing skills required by such
students. We try to bridge that gap by teaching relevant
skills. This means that the floating school offers relevant
subjects to students and this decision is taken by those
in charge.

5

A

6

A

C

It informs students about developments in ecological
areas is correct because the speaker says we can fill in
knowledge gaps and provide relevant up-to-date
information on the protection of ecosystems, and skills
and techniques to support this. This means that the
school’s role is to provide ecological information about
what is happening regarding fishing.
It gives practical advice about how students can find
work is not correct because the speaker says It isn’t up
to us to tell people how to run their industry, but to
facilitate practical learning about what matters for the
future of our oceans. This means that the school can
encourage students to consider the future of fishing
and the environment, but it does not provide practical
advice about finding a job.
It changes attitudes about marine life in remote
locations is not correct because the speaker says Those
in the fishing industry, around isolated islands or
otherwise, are well aware of the need to fish in a
sustainable manner … isn’t that there’s a lack of
understanding about these matters. This means that
those who work in fishing already know about the
importance of protecting marine life in the area and the
school is not there to change attitudes.

B

They offer students an insight into potential careers is
correct because the speaker says that these people talk
about their professions. We have a good database now,
including doctors, lawyers, engineers, journalists,
musicians … you name it! There’s usually a relatively
brief presentation followed by a question-and-answer
session. This means that students find out about
different professions from the field experts.
They provide useful networking opportunities for
students is not correct because the speaker says that
the volunteers speak to the students and allow them to
ask questions about the role, but this is not the same as
networking opportunities.

© Oxford University Press

Delighted by former students’ feedback about it is
correct because the speaker says It’s hugely satisfying
to have seen students all the way through to university
and hear them say how keen they are to remain in their
island community to give something back through their
own learning with us. This means that the writer is
pleased when students say positive things about their
learning with the floating school.
Astonished by the quick success it achieved is not
correct because the speaker says Like anything, it takes
time for new ideas to take hold, and we’ve gradually
grown. This means that it took time for the school to be
successful.
Keen to see how planned projects will work out is not
correct because the speaker says Sometimes people ask
me how we’ll continue to develop. To be honest, I think
we’ve got a winning formula, so for the time being, we’ll
continue to deliver our programmes just as they are,
responding to change if necessary. This means that
there are no particular plans for the school because it is
working very well as it is.
It has been recognized by others as being significant is
correct because the text says That’s a massive vote of
confidence in our work from those working in
challenging circumstances which means that others
think the education model is very good.
She is delighted to start work with others who work in
the same way is not correct because although she says
I’m thrilled to hear that others in a similar situation are
looking at what we’ve done and using our model as a
starting point for their work, she does not talk about
working with other people.
To begin with, the challenges seemed impossible to
overcome is not correct because the text says If I’d
known what I know now at the start, I’d have done
some things differently suggesting that at the beginning
she did not think it would be as difficult.

D Listening
1
2
3
4
5
6

B
A
A
C
B
C

1

B

An informal setting is correct because the woman says
I’m not dressed for that. Mind if we grab a pizza from
the corner shop? That’ll be quick to heat up in our oven.
This means that the woman would prefer to cook a
pizza at home, which is not the formal setting of a
restaurant.

Insight Upper-intermediate • Answer key

4

2

3

4

An interesting atmosphere is not correct because the
woman says But not that American diner on Bridge
Street again! It was cosy and the staff were incredibly
welcoming – the food let it down, though. This means
that the atmosphere at the diner was nice, but the food
was poor.
A new experience is not correct because the man says
I’ve read great reviews of the Italian that’s just opened
on Whitgate. It looks stylish and I know you love a big
bowl of pasta and the woman says Mind if we grab a
pizza … That’ll be quick to heat up in our oven. This
means that the man suggests food that the woman likes,
but the woman suggests a pizza from the local shop.
We know this is not a new experience because the
woman knows it will not take long to heat up at home.

5

A

It takes a lot of time to be good at it is correct because
the woman says I’m not sure I can be bothered going to
the lengths you need to, to improve … I know people
who’ve been surfing for months before managing even
the simplest trick and the man says It’s slow-going
getting anywhere with it. This means that they agree
that it takes a long time to be good at surfing.
It might be easier than it looks is not correct because
the woman says When you watch people, even good
surfers, they seem to be in the water more often than
on their boards and the man says I know. This means
that surfing looks hard to do, and they do not say that it
might be easier than it looks.
It must be a lot of fun once skills are acquired is not
correct because the man says It must be brilliant,
though, riding big waves and the woman says I can
think of more appealing ways to spend my weekends, if
I’m honest. This means that they do not agree that
surfing is fun.

6

A

To prompt his friend to contact him is correct because
the man says I assume it’s slipped your mind that you
were coming to meet me in town? … do call me back as
soon as you get this. This means that Oscar wants Kate
to ring him as soon as possible.
To justify his reason for not buying tickets is not correct
because the man says It’s just that if you wanted me to
get tickets for the movie, time’s running out – I don’t
want to do that unless I know you’re on your way. This
means that he is unsure whether Kate wants a ticket.
This is not the same as him justifying why he has not
bought tickets yet.
To remind his friend that he cannot meet up with her is
not correct because he says it was me that had to
cancel last time, but it is the woman who has not yet
arrived for the meet-up today.

C

How realistic the characters were is correct because the
woman says it’s like you get right inside the minds of
Ajay and Jack ... we all think like that sometimes, don’t
we. This means that she thinks the characters are
realistic.
How complex the storyline was is not correct because
the woman says I’m not usually into those prize-winning
books – they tend to be too weird for my liking. You
know, like the plot jumps around too much. She is
talking about prize-winning books and not the one that
her friend has lent her.

© Oxford University Press

How unusual the writing style was is not correct
because the woman says they tend to be too weird for
my liking … like the plot jumps around too much or you
need to read it with a dictionary by your side, but she is
referring to the plot and words used in prize-winning
books, but not the writing style of the book she has
borrowed.

B

She will look out of place is correct because the woman
says I guess most women will wear dresses … I don’t
want to stand out, though. This means that she will
wear something different to other women and this may
make her stand out, which she does not want.
She will feel uncomfortable is not correct because the
man says I think you should go in whatever you feel
most confident in and the woman agrees. This means
the suit is not uncomfortable.
She will not seem sophisticated is not correct because
the woman says it’s gorgeous and very elegant and all
that, so I’ve no worries on that front which means that
her suit is sophisticated and she is not worried about
that being a problem.

C

Disappointment about not sitting where he hoped to is
correct because the man says what’s the point in having
a reservation for a seat if they let people sit anywhere.
This means that he is disappointed that he was not able
to sit in the seat that he had reserved.
Surprise at how many people are on the train is not
correct because the man says I suppose I should have
anticipated these crowds, what with it being the
weekend which means that he is not surprised by the
number of people.
Amazement at how well the musicians he heard played
is not correct because the man says there was plenty
going on at the station with those musicians. Not sure
they should give up their jobs though. This means that
he noticed the musicians, but was not amazed at how
well they played.

E Listening
1
2
3
4
5
6

B
C
B
A
A
C

1

B

It is a process that people who go to live abroad go
through is correct because the speaker says Culture
shock occurs when a person moves overseas to live,
work or study … it involves several complex stages. This
means that people who go to live abroad experience
different emotions, which is part of the whole process
of becoming comfortable living in another country.
It happens when someone has no communication with
home is not correct because the speaker says they find
themselves away from their usual surroundings, own
culture, and possibly language, even if they maintain
links with their country. This means that they are in new
surroundings, and may have to speak another language,
but this is not the same as having no communication
with home.

Insight Upper-intermediate • Answer key

5

2

3

4

It is likely to have a different impact on different people
is not correct because the speaker says A person
experiencing culture shock is likely to notice a variety of
emotions, ranging from excitement to confusion. These
affect every individual, whatever their personality. This
means that culture shock affects everyone who moves
abroad.

5

A

6

C

C

She embraced every new experience that came her way
is correct because the speaker says It was all exotic,
from the food to the clothing, to the music, to my new
Scottish friends. I tried it all. This means that the
speaker enjoyed trying all of the cultural aspects of
Scotland.
She relied on people she met to help her understand the
culture is not correct because the speaker says my new
Scottish friends … This lasted for several wonderful
weeks, and enabled me to settle in to my new way of
living. This means that the speaker made new … friends,
and became involved in the culture, but she did not rely
on her friends for this.
She studied the new culture at a distance is not correct
because the speaker says When I moved to Scotland, I
was thrilled with everything in sight … I tried it all. This
means that she tried everything the new culture had to
offer, and got involved in it. This means she did not
study it from a distance.

B

Surprised by the sudden variations in her mood is
correct because the speaker says she was confused … I
would swing from happy one minute to upset the next.
It was all so strange and unexpected. This means that
the speaker was surprised when she felt various
emotions because she did not expect to do so.
Eager to experience some home comforts is not correct
because the speaker says felt desperate for sunshine …
missing friends back home that I had real history with.
This means that she missed the climate and her friends,
but this is not the same as the comforts of her home.
Annoyed that she was unable to adapt to her new life is
not correct because the speaker says that it was
confusing and there were things that she did not like
such as the climate and repetitive food, but she does
not say that she was annoyed not to be able to adapt.

That it was possible to combine elements of two
cultures is correct because the speaker says it was
almost like I had a second nationality … I still kept things
from back home, like dishes I loved and traditions I
celebrated. But I also adopted new ideas and ways of
living. This means that she enjoyed elements of both
cultures at the same time.
That other people no longer viewed her as a foreigner is
not correct because the speaker says a friend told me I
was now ‘Scottish’ … though I knew she was kind of
joking. This means that the speaker’s friend was joking
that she had become ‘Scottish’, but this indicated that
she had made progress in adapting to the culture.
That she had a full understanding of Scottish culture is
not correct because the speaker says The last phase of
culture shock is the ‘mastery’ phase. Mastery means
you feel comfortable in everyday situations. No, I’m not
an expert in everything Scottish. This means that the
speaker felt comfortable in familiar situations, but not
others.
Do not try to avoid culture shock is correct because the
speaker says Expect the unexpected and accept that
culture shock will hit you. This means that no one who
moves abroad will escape from experiencing culture
shock.
Take time away from situations if they are difficult is
not correct because the speaker says try not to hide
away while you’re adjusting, which means that the
speaker does not advise people to take time away from
situations just because they feel difficult.
Explain to your friends how you are feeling is not
correct because the speaker says Just go with your
feelings because you’ll come out the other side and feel
more positive again … if you do need to speak in
another language, don’t be hard on yourself if you make
mistakes. You’ll find that your friends will always
support you. This means that the speaker advises
experiencing their feelings and making friends, and that
friends will be supportive when speaking in the second
language.

A

She made some conscious changes to her behaviour is
correct because the speaker says I adjusted what I did
to fit in with those around me. This means that the
speaker changed the way she behaved to be similar to
those around her.
She requested help with the language barrier is not
correct because the speaker says I even adopted local
expressions, which my Scottish friends found hilarious.
This means that she made the effort to use local
expressions, which indicates that she did not have a
problem with a language barrier.
She became tired of constantly having to adjust her
expectations is not correct because although the
speaker says it left me exhausted at times and I slept a
lot, this does not mean that she was fed up with, or
tired of, changing what she expected.

© Oxford University Press

Insight Upper-intermediate • Answer key

6

